.\" $Revision: 1.8.0.0 $
.TH CLIO 6
.SH NAME
clio \- curses based client for MUD2
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B clio
[
.BI \-ehlnuvw
]
[
.BI \-a " account"
]
[
.BI \-b " user"
]
[
.BI \-c " upassword"
]
[
.BI \-f " directory"
]
[
.BI \-m " map"
]
[
.BI \-p " apassword"
]
[
.BI \-q " level"
]
[
.BI \-s " lines"
]
.I host
[
.I port
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B clio
connects to the MUD2 server on the specified
.I host
and starts a telnet session. When logged in, it puts the MUD2 server
into client mode, providing the user with status information and local
command editing facilities.

By default,
.B clio
connects to the host on the standard telnet port, 23. If
.I port
is given on the command line, it is used instead of port 23.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-a
Specifies the account number to be sent in response to the
``Account ID:'' prompt when using autologin.
.TP
.B \-b
Specifies the username to be sent in response to the ``login:'' prompt
when using autologin.
.TP
.B \-c
Specifies the password to be sent in response to the ``Password:''
prompt when using autologin.

This is the password for the username specified
with the ``\fB-b\fP'' option. It is not normally required when logging
in as \fBmud\fP, but may be required for some other usernames.

Use the
``\fB-p\fP'' flag to specify the account password.
.TP
.B \-e
The ``\fB\-e\fP'' option causes
.B clio
to treat a blank input line as equivalent to \fBCTRL-L\fP. The effect of
this is to repeat the last command when ENTER is pressed with an empty
input buffer.
.TP
.B \-f
Specifies the directory under which to create logfiles. If the ``\fB-f\fP''
option is not given, the MUD2 server hostname is used.
.TP
.B \-h
Log the current session to an HTML file. The logfile is created 
below the directory
.B cliologs
in your home directory.
.TP
.B \-l
Similar to the ``\fB-h\fP'' option, but the logfile is created in 
plain text format.
.TP
.B \-m
Use the specified \fBmap\fP file to tell \fBclio\fP how to map from
the standard ISO-8859-1 character set to the character set used by
the local screen.
.TP
.B \-n
Do not attempt to automatically enter client mode. If this option is
used
.B clio
will leave the server in ANSI mode. No status information is displayed
when using ANSI mode.
.TP
.B \-p
Specifies the password to be sent in response to the ``Password:''
prompt when using autologin. This is the password for the account
specified with the ``\fB-a\fP'' option. Use the ``\fB-c\fP'' flag to
specify the login password.
.TP
.B \-q
Specify the initial sound effects level. A
.I level
of 0 disables all sound effects, 1 enables the standard sound effects
and 2 enables both the standard and extended sound effects. The 
default value is 2.
.TP
.B \-s
Specify the size of the scroll back buffer. The default size is 300
lines.  A large buffer may slow down scrolling.
.TP
.B \-u
.B clio
will normally highlight any URLs in bright blue. The ``\fB-u\fP''
option suppresses this behaviour, causing the URLs to be displayed using
the same colour as the surrounding text.
.TP
.B \-v
Display the
.B clio
version number and then exit.
.TP
.B \-w
Use the standard \fBMUDII.co.uk\fP colour scheme instead of the usual
\fBMUD2.com\fP colour scheme.
.SH "AUTOLOGIN SECURITY"
When using the autologin feature, there are a number of security issues
which must be considered. If the ``\fB-a\fP'', ``\fB-b\fP'',
``\fB-c\fP''
or ``\fB-p\fP'' options are used to specify an account name or
password on the command line, it may be possible for other users on
the system to see this information by using \fBps\fP(1) or similar
commands.

An alternative method of passing account and password information is to
use the \fBCLIOLUSER\fP, \fBCLIOLPASS\fP, \fBCLIOUSER\fP and
\fBCLIOPASS\fP environment variables. However,
care should be taken to avoid these being recorded, for example in 
your shell's history file. Also, if using these environment variables
in a shell script, you should ensure that it is unreadable by other
users.
.SH "SCROLL BACK"
Previous screen output can be reviewed using the \fBPAGE UP\fP and 
\fBPAGE DOWN\fP keys to move through the scroll back buffer. Pressing
the \fBCTRL-A\fP key at any point returns to the end of the buffer.

The size of the scroll back buffer can be changed using the ``\fB-s\fP''
option.
.SH "FUNCTION KEYS"
The function keys F1 to F12 can have commonly used commands bound
to them, allowing them to be sent with a single keystroke. To bind
commands to the function keys, create a
.B .cliorc
file in your home directory, containing lines such as:
F1=who.

Keys F13 to F24 are mapped to \fBSHIFT-F1\fP to \fBSHIFT-F12\fP, and
keys F25 to F36 are mapped to \fBCTRL-F1\fP to \fBCTRL-F12\fP.
.SH "DREAMWORDS"
.B clio
will detect any dreamwords sent by the MUD2 server, and will display
them on the status line. Dreamwords can be automatically spoken by
pressing \fBCTRL-D\fP.
.SH "SOUND EFFECTS"
.B clio
can play sound effects in response to certain events within the
game. See the
.B readme.txt
file in 
.B /usr/local/lib/clio/sounds
for more details.
.SH "SCREEN HANDLING"
.B clio
uses the
.I curses
library to handle the screen. In order for curses to function correctly
it needs to know both your terminal type and which codes it responds
to. Your terminal type is read from the \fBTERM\fP environment
variable, and the list of codes your terminal understands is read from
the system terminfo database.

In addition, your terminal needs to have been correctly initialised to
its default settings before you start \fBclio\fP.

Normally, all this is set up for you automatically when you first
login, via a command in your \fB\.profile\fP or \fB.login\fP file.

If your screen does not display correctly, try the following
procedures to correct it:
.TP
*
Quit
.B clio
and type \fBtput init\fP to initialise your terminal.
Then try running \fBclio\fP again.
.TP
*
Type \fBecho $TERM\fP to check the value of the \fBTERM\fP
environment variable. If you are running on the system console, a
value of \fBconsole\fP, \fBansi\fP, or \fBlinux\fP would be
reasonable, depending on the version of UNIX you are using.
.TP
*
If you are running on a terminal or via a terminal emulation
package, the value of
.B TERM
should reflect the type of terminal you are using. For example,
.B wy60
for a Wyse 60 terminal.
.TP
*
If you think your
.B TERM
setting may be wrong, try changing it.  How you do this will depend
on the type of shell you are running.  For Bourne-like shells try
\fBTERM=ansi\fP, and for csh-like shells try \fBsetenv TERM ansi\fP.
Try various other values in place of \fBansi\fP.
\.  Other common
.B TERM
types worth trying are
.B vt100
and \fBwy60\fP. Remember to do a
.B tput init
each time you change the value of \fBTERM\fP.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The behaviour of
.B clio
can be modified by setting a number of environment variables. If both
command line options and environment variables are supplied, the
command line options will take precedence.
.TP
CLIOHOST
The hostname of the MUD2 server.
.TP
CLIOPORT
The port to connect to on the MUD2 server.
.TP
CLIOLUSER
The initial login name for the MUD2 server. Usually \fBmud\fP.
.TP
CLIOLPASS
The password associated with the \fBCLIOLUSER\fP login name. This
may not be required as the \fBmud\fP login does not normally have
a password.
.TP
CLIOUSER
The MUD2 account number.
.TP
CLIOPASS
The password associated with the \fBCLIOUSER\fP account number.
.TP
CLIOSOUNDS
The directory containing the 
.B clio
sound effects. Defaults to \fB/usr/local/lib/clio/sounds/\fP.
.TP
HOME
The user's home directory.
.TP
TERM
The user's terminal type.
.TP
TERMINFO
The location of the terminfo database.
.SH FILES
.TP
$HOME/.cliorc
.B clio
configuration file.
.TP
$HOME/cliologs
Top level directory for log files.
.TP
$CLIOSOUNDS/*.wav
.B clio
sound effects.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by Ian Peattie <ian@wabe.org.uk>.
.SH BUGS
Please report any problems to <clio@wabe.org.uk>.
.SH "WEB PAGE"
http://www.wabe.org.uk/clio/
.SH "VERSION"
This manual documents
.B clio
version 1.8.
.SH STATUS
Clio is OSI Certified Open Source Software.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
\fBtelnet\fP(1), \fBtput\fP(1), \fBcurses\fP(3), \fBterminfo\fP(5).
